<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!--
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Statement on Bahá’u’lláh
by Baha'i International Community



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license

This is a _copyrighted_ Project Gutenberg eBook, details below. Please
follow the copyright guidelines in this file.



Title: Statement on Bahá’u’lláh

Author: Baha'i International Community

Release Date: September 2006 [Ebook #19290]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8
-->

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Statement on Bahá’u’lláh</title>
      <author>Baha'i International Community</author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date value="2006-9">September 2006</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">19290</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>From Baha'i Reference Library Terms of Use:</p>

        <p>You have permission to freely make and use copies of the text and any
           other information ("Content") available on this Site including printing,
           emailing, posting, distributing, copying, downloading, uploading,
           transmitting, displaying the Content in whole or in part subject to the
           following:</p>

        <p>1. Our copyright notice and the source reference must be attached to the Content;</p>
        <p>2. The Content may not be modified or altered in any way except to change the font or appearance;</p>
        <p>3. The Content must be used solely for a non-commercial purpose.</p>

        <p>Although this blanket permission to reproduce the Content is given
           freely such that no special permission is required, the Bahá’í
           International Community retains full copyright protection for all
           Content included at this Site under all applicable national and
           international laws.</p>

        <p>For permission to publish, transmit, display or otherwise use the
           Content for any commercial purpose, please contact us
           (http://reference.bahai.org/en/contact.html).</p>

        <p>From Project Gutenberg:</p>

        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license, except where limited by
        the Baha'i Reference Library Terms of Use listed above.</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
    <classDecl>
      <taxonomy id="lc">
        <bibl>
          <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
        </bibl>
      </taxonomy>
    </classDecl>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
    </langUsage>
    <textClass>
    </textClass>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2006-6">June 2006</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>Joshua Hutchinson</name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Converted from Microsoft Word document format to TEI master format.</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>

    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">
      <divGen type="titlepage" />
    </div>

   <div rend="page-break-before: right">
     <index index="toc" /><index index="pdf" />
<head rend="text-align: center">Baha'i Terms of Use</head>

<p>You have permission to freely make and use copies of the text and any
other information ("Content") available on this Site including printing,
emailing, posting, distributing, copying, downloading, uploading,
transmitting, displaying the Content in whole or in part subject to the
following:</p>

<p>1. Our copyright notice and the source reference must be attached to
the Content;</p>

<p>2. The Content may not be modified or altered in any way except to
change the font or appearance;</p>

<p>3. The Content must be used solely for a non-commercial purpose.</p>

<p>Although this blanket permission to reproduce the Content is given
freely such that no special permission is required, the Bahá’í
International Community retains full copyright protection for all
Content included at this Site under all applicable national and
international laws.</p>

<p>For permission to publish, transmit, display or otherwise use the
Content for any commercial purpose, please contact us
(http://reference.bahai.org/en/contact.html).</p>
   </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: right">

<index index="pdf" />

<head rend="text-align: center">Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>
</front>

<body>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<p>Bahá’í International
Community<lb />
Office of Public Information<lb />
New York</p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Preface</head>

<p>May 29, 1992, marks the centenary of the passing of
Bahá’u’lláh. His vision of humanity as one
people and of the earth as a common homeland, dismissed out of hand
by the world leaders to whom it was first enunciated over a hundred
years ago, has today become the focus of human hope. Equally
inescapable is the collapse of moral and social order, which this
same declaration foresaw with awesome clarity.</p>

<p>The occasion has encouraged publication of this brief
introduction to Bahá’u’lláh’s life
and work. Prepared at the request of the Universal House of Justice,
trustee of the global undertaking which the events of a century ago
set in motion, it offers a perspective on the feeling of confidence
with which Bahá’ís the world over contemplate the
future of our planet and our race.</p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>BAHÁ’U’LLÁH</head>

<p>As the new millennium approaches, the crucial need of
the human race is to find a unifying vision of the nature of man and
society. For the past century humanity’s response to this
impulse has driven a succession of ideological upheavals that have
convulsed our world and that appear now to have exhausted themselves.
The passion invested in the struggle, despite its disheartening
results, testifies to the depth of the need. For, without a common
conviction about the course and direction of human history, it is
inconceivable that foundations can be laid for a global society to
which the mass of humankind can commit themselves.</p>

<p>Such a vision unfolds in the writings of Bahá’u’lláh,
the nineteenth century prophetic figure whose growing influence is
the most remarkable development of contemporary religious history.
Born in Persia, November 12, 1817, Bahá’u’lláh<note place="foot"><p>Bahá’u’lláh
(“Glory of God”) was born Ḥusayn-‘Alí.
The authoritative work on the missions of the Báb and
Bahá’u’lláh is Shoghi Effendi’s God
Passes By (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust,
1987). For a biographical study see Hasan Balyuzi’s
Bahá’u’lláh: The King of Glory (Oxford:
George Ronald, 1980). Bahá’u’lláh’s
writings are extensively reviewed in Adib Taherzadeh’s The
Revelation of Bahá’u’lláh (Oxford: George
Ronald, 1975), four volumes.</p></note>
began at age 27 an undertaking that has gradually captured the
imagination and loyalty of several million people from virtually
every race, culture, class, and nation on earth. The phenomenon is
one that has no reference points in the contemporary world, but is
associated rather with climactic changes of direction in the
collective past of the human race. For Bahá’u’lláh
claimed to be no less than the Messenger of God to the age of human
maturity, the Bearer of a Divine Revelation that fulfills the
promises made in earlier religions, and that will generate the
spiritual nerves and sinews for the unification of the peoples of the
world.</p>

<p>If they were to do nothing else, the effects which
Bahá’u’lláh’s life and writings have
already had should command the earnest attention of anyone who
believes that human nature is fundamentally spiritual and that the
coming organization of our planet must be informed by this aspect of
reality. The documentation lies open to general scrutiny. For the
first time in history humanity has available a detailed and
verifiable record of the birth of an independent religious system and
of the life of its Founder. Equally accessible is the record of the
response that the new faith has evoked, through the emergence of a
global community which can already justly claim to represent a
microcosm of the human race.<note place="foot"><p>Britannica
Yearbook, 1988, indicates that, although the Bahá’í
community numbers only about five million members, the Faith has
already become the most widely diffused religion on earth, after
Christianity. There are today 155 Bahá’í
National Assemblies in independent countries and major territories
of the globe, and more than 17,000 elected Assemblies functioning at
the local level. It is estimated that 2,112 nationalities and tribes
are represented.</p></note></p>

<p>During the earlier decades of this century, this
development was relatively obscure. Bahá’u’lláh’s
writings forbid the aggressive proselytism through which many
religious messages have been widely promulgated. Further, the
priority which the Bahá’í community gave to the
establishment of groups at the local level throughout the entire
planet militated against the early emergence of large concentrations
of adherents in any one country or the mobilization of resources
required for large-scale programs of public information. Arnold
Toynbee, intrigued by phenomena that might represent the emergence of
a new universal religion, noted in the 1950s that the Bahá’í
Faith was then about as familiar to the average educated Westerner as
Christianity had been to the corresponding class in the Roman empire
during the second century A.D.<note place="foot"><p>Arnold
Toynbee, A Study of History, Vol. VIII (London: Oxford, 1954), p.
117.</p></note></p>

<p>In more recent years, as the Bahá’í
community’s numbers have rapidly increased in many countries,
the situation has changed dramatically. There is now virtually no
area in the world where the pattern of life taught by Bahá’u’lláh
is not taking root. The respect which the community’s social
and economic development projects are beginning to win in
governmental, academic, and United Nations circles further reinforces
the argument for a detached and serious examination of the impulse
behind a process of social transformation that is, in critical
respects, unique in our world.</p>

<p>No uncertainty surrounds the nature of the generating
impulse. Bahá’u’lláh’s writings cover
an enormous range of subjects from social issues such as racial
integration, the equality of the sexes, and disarmament, to those
questions that affect the innermost life of the human soul. The
original texts, many of them in His own hand, the others dictated and
affirmed by their author, have been meticulously preserved. For
several decades, a systematic program of translation and publication
has made selections from Bahá’u’lláh’s
writings accessible to people everywhere, in over eight hundred
languages.</p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Birth of a New Revelation</head>

<p>Bahá’u’lláh’s mission
began in a subterranean dungeon in Teheran in August 1852. Born into
a noble family that could trace its ancestry back to the great
dynasties of Persia’s imperial past, He declined the
ministerial career open to Him in government, and chose instead to
devote His energies to a range of philanthropies which had, by the
early 1840s, earned Him widespread renown as “Father of the
Poor.” This privileged existence swiftly eroded after 1844,
when Bahá’u’lláh became one of the leading
advocates of a movement that was to change the course of His
country’s history.</p>

<p>The early nineteenth century was a period of messianic
expectations in many lands. Deeply disturbed by the implications of
scientific inquiry and industrialization, earnest believers from many
religious backgrounds turned to the scriptures of their faiths for an
understanding of the accelerating processes of change. In Europe and
America groups like the Templers and the Millerites believed they had
found in the Christian scriptures evidence supporting their
conviction that history had ended and the return of Jesus Christ was
at hand. A markedly similar ferment developed in the Middle East
around the belief that the fulfillment of various prophecies in the
Qur’án and Islamic Traditions was imminent.</p>

<p>By far the most dramatic of these millennialist
movements had been the one in Persia, which had focused on the person
and teachings of a young merchant from the city of Shiraz, known to
history as the Báb.<note place="foot"><p>The
Báb (“Gate” or “Door”) was born
Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad in Shiraz, October 20, 1819.</p></note>
For nine years, from 1844 to 1853, Persians of all classes had been
caught up in a storm of hope and excitement aroused by the Báb’s
announcement that the Day of God was at hand and that He was himself
the One promised in Islamic scripture. Humanity stood, He said, on
the threshold of an era that would witness the restructuring of all
aspects of life. New fields of learning, as yet inconceivable, would
permit even the children of the new age to surpass the most erudite
of nineteenth-century scholars. The human race was called by God to
embrace these changes through undertaking a transformation of its
moral and spiritual life. His own mission was to prepare humanity for
the event that lay at the heart of these developments, the coming of
that universal Messenger of God, “He Whom God will make
manifest,” awaited by the followers of all religions.<note place="foot"><p>Passages
in the Báb’s writings which refer to the advent of “Him
Whom God will make manifest” include cryptic references to
“the year Nine” and “the year Nineteen”
(i.e. roughly 1852 and 1863, calculating in lunar years from the
year of the Báb’s inauguration of His mission, 1844).
On several occasions the Báb also indicated to certain of His
followers that they would themselves come to recognize and serve
“Him Whom God will make manifest.”</p></note></p>

<p>The claim had evoked violent hostility from the Muslim
clergy, who taught that the process of Divine Revelation had ended
with Muḥammad; and that any assertion to the contrary
represented apostasy, punishable by death. Their denunciation of the
Báb had soon enlisted the support of the Persian authorities.
Thousands of followers of the new faith had perished in a horrific
series of massacres throughout the country, and the Báb had
been publicly executed on July 9, 1850.<note place="foot"><p>The
proclamation of the Báb’s message had been carried out
in mosques and public places by enthusiastic bands of followers,
many of them young seminarians. The Muslim clergy had replied by
inciting mob violence. Unfortunately, these events coincided with a
political crisis created by the death of Muḥammad <hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Sh</hi>áh
and a struggle over the succession. It was the leaders of the
successful political faction, behind the boy-king Náṣiri’d-Dín
<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Sh</hi>áh, who then turned the royal army against the Bábí
enthusiasts. The latter, raised in a Muslim frame of reference, and
believing that they had a moral right to self-defense, barricaded
themselves in makeshift shelters and withstood long, bloody sieges.
When they had eventually been overcome and slaughtered, and the Báb
had been executed, two deranged Bábí youth stopped the
Shah in a public road and fired birdshot at him, in an ill-conceived
attempt at assassination. It was this incident which provided the
excuse for the worst of the massacres of Bábís which
evoked protests from Western embassies. For an account of the period
see W. Hatcher and D. Martin, The Bahá’í Faith:
The Emerging Global Religion (San Francisco: Harper and Row, 1985),
pp. 6–32.</p></note>
In an age of growing Western involvement in the Orient, these events
had aroused interest and compassion in influential European circles.
The nobility of the Báb’s life and teachings, the
heroism of His followers, and the hope for fundamental reform that
they had kindled in a darkened land had exerted a powerful attraction
for personalities ranging from Ernest Renan and Leo Tolstoy to Sarah
Bernhardt and the Comte de Gobineau.<note place="foot"><p>For
an account of these events see God Passes By, chapters I-V. Western
interest in the Bábí movement was aroused,
particularly, by the publication in 1865 of Joseph Arthur Comte de
Gobineau’s Les religions et les philosophies dans l’Asie
centrale (Paris: Didier, 1865).</p></note></p>

<p>Because of His prominence in the defense of the Báb’s
cause, Bahá’u’lláh was arrested and
brought, in chains and on foot, to Teheran. Protected in some measure
by an impressive personal reputation and the social position of His
family, as well as by protests which the Bábí pogroms
had evoked from Western embassies, He was not sentenced to death, as
influential figures at the royal court were urging. Instead, He was
cast into the notorious Síyáh-<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Ch</hi>ál, the
“Black Pit”, a deep, vermin-infested dungeon which had
been created in one of the city’s abandoned reservoirs. No
charges were laid but He and some thirty companions were, without
appeal, kept immured in the darkness and filth of this pit,
surrounded by hardened criminals, many of them under sentence of
death. Around Bahá’u’lláh’s neck was
clamped a heavy chain, so notorious in penal circles as to have been
given its own name. When He did not quickly perish, as had been
expected, an attempt was made to poison Him. The marks of the chain
were to remain on His body for the rest of His life.</p>

<p>Central to Bahá’u’lláh’s
writings is an exposition of the great themes which have preoccupied
religious thinkers throughout the ages: God, the role of Revelation
in history, the relationship of the world’s religious systems
to one another, the meaning of faith, and the basis of moral
authority in the organization of human society. Passages in these
texts speak intimately of His own spiritual experience, of His
response to the Divine summons, and of the dialogue with the “Spirit
of God” which lay at the heart of His mission. Religious
history has never before offered the inquirer the opportunity for so
candid an encounter with the phenomenon of Divine Revelation.</p>

<p>Toward the end of His life, Bahá’u’lláh’s
writings on His early experiences included a brief description of the
conditions in the Síyáh-<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Ch</hi>ál.</p>

<p>We were consigned for four months to
a place foul beyond comparison.... The dungeon was wrapped in thick
darkness, and Our fellow-prisoners numbered nearly a hundred and
fifty souls: thieves, assassins and highwaymen. Though crowded, it
had no other outlet than the passage by which We entered. No pen can
depict that place, nor any tongue describe its loathsome smell. Most
of these men had neither clothes nor bedding to lie on. God alone
knoweth what befell Us in that most foul-smelling and gloomy place!<note place="foot"><p>Bahá’u’lláh,
Epistle to the Son of the Wolf (Wilmette: Bahá’í
Publishing Trust, 1979), pp. 20–21.</p></note></p>

<p>Each day the guards would descend the three steep
flights of stairs of the pit, seize one or more of the prisoners, and
drag them out to be executed. In the streets of Teheran, Western
observers were appalled by scenes of Bábí victims blown
from cannon mouths, hacked to death by axes and swords, and led to
their deaths with burning candles inserted into open wounds in their
bodies.<note place="foot"><p>A
number of Western diplomatic and military observers have left
harrowing accounts of what they witnessed. Several formal protests
were registered with the Persian authorities. See Moojan Momen, The
Bábí and Bahá’í Religions,
1844–1944 (Oxford: George Ronald, 1981).</p></note>
It was in these circumstances, and faced with the prospect of His own
imminent death, that Bahá’u’lláh received
the first intimation of His mission:</p>

<p>One night, in a dream, these exalted
words were heard on every side: “Verily, We shall render Thee
victorious by Thyself and by Thy Pen. Grieve Thou not for that which
hath befallen Thee, neither be Thou afraid, for Thou art in safety.
Erelong will God raise up the treasures of the earth--men who
will aid Thee through Thyself and through Thy name, wherewith God
hath revived the hearts of such as have recognized Him.”<note place="foot"><p>Epistle,
p. 21.</p></note></p>

<p>The experience of Divine Revelation, touched on only at
secondhand in surviving accounts of the lives of the Buddha, Moses,
Jesus Christ, and Muḥammad, is described graphically in
Bahá’u’lláh’s own words:</p>

<p>During the days I lay in the prison
of Ṭihrán, though the galling weight of the chains and
the stench-filled air allowed Me but little sleep, still in those
infrequent moments of slumber I felt as if something flowed from the
crown of My head over My breast, even as a mighty torrent that
precipitateth itself upon the earth from the summit of a lofty
mountain. Every limb of My body would, as a result, be set afire. At
such moments My tongue recited what no man could bear to hear.<note place="foot"><p>Epistle,
p. 22.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Exile</head>

<p>Eventually, still without trial or recourse, Bahá’u’lláh
was released from prison and immediately banished from His native
land, His wealth and properties arbitrarily confiscated. The Russian
diplomatic representative, who knew Him personally and who had
followed the Bábí persecutions with growing distress,
offered Him his protection and refuge in lands under the control of
his government. In the prevailing political climate, acceptance of
such help would almost certainly have been misrepresented by others
as having political implications.<note place="foot"><p>There
was, understandably, great suspicion in Persia about the intentions
of the British and Russian governments, both of which had long
interfered in Persian affairs.</p></note>
Perhaps for this reason, Bahá’u’lláh chose
to accept banishment to the neighboring territory of Iraq, then under
the rule of the Ottoman Empire. This expulsion was the beginning of
forty years of exile, imprisonment, and bitter persecution.</p>

<p>In the years which immediately followed His departure
from Persia, Bahá’u’lláh gave priority to
the needs of the Bábí community which had gathered in
Baghdad, a task which had devolved on Him as the only effective Bábí
leader to have survived the massacres. The death of the Báb
and the almost simultaneous loss of most of the young faith’s
teachers and guides had left the body of the believers scattered and
demoralized. When His efforts to rally those who had fled to Iraq
aroused jealousy and dissension,<note place="foot"><p>The
focal point of these problems was one Mírzá Yaḥyá,
a younger half-brother of Bahá’u’lláh.
While still a youth and under the guidance of Bahá’u’lláh
Yaḥyá had been appointed by the Báb as nominal
head of the Bábí community, pending the imminent
advent of “Him Whom God will make manifest.” Falling
under the influence of a former Muslim theologian, Siyyid Muḥammad
Iṣfáhání, however, Yaḥyá
gradually became estranged from his brother. Rather than being
expressed openly, this resentment found its outlet in clandestine
agitation, which had a disastrous effect on the exiles’
already low morale. Yaḥyá eventually refused to accept
Bahá’u’lláh’s declaration, and
played no role in the development of the Bahá’í
Faith which this declaration initiated.</p></note>
He followed the path that had been taken by all of the Messengers of
God gone before Him, and withdrew to the wilderness, choosing for the
purpose the mountain region of Kurdistan. His withdrawal, as He later
said, had “contemplated no return.” Its reason “was
to avoid becoming a subject of discord among the faithful, a source
of disturbance unto Our companions.” Although the two years
spent in Kurdistan were a period of intense privation and physical
hardship, Bahá’u’lláh describes them as a
time of profound happiness during which He reflected deeply on the
message entrusted to Him: “Alone, We communed with Our spirit,
oblivious of the world and all that is therein.”<note place="foot"><p>Bahá’u’lláh,
The Book of Certitude (Wilmette: Bahá’í
Publishing Trust, 1985), p. 251.</p></note></p>

<p>Only with great reluctance, believing it His
responsibility to the cause of the Báb, did He eventually
accede to urgent messages from the remnant of the desperate group of
exiles in Baghdad who had discovered His whereabouts and appealed to
Him to return and assume the leadership of their community.</p>

<p>Two of the most important volumes of Bahá’u’lláh’s
writings date from this first period of exile, preceding the
declaration of His mission in 1863. The first of these is a small
book which He named The Hidden Words. Written in the form of a
compilation of moral aphorisms, the volume represents the ethical
heart of Bahá’u’lláh’s message. In
verses which Bahá’u’lláh describes as a
distillation of the spiritual guidance of all the Revelations of the
past, the voice of God speaks directly to the human soul:</p>

<p>O Son of Spirit!<lb />The best beloved of all things in My
sight is Justice; turn not away therefrom if thou desirest Me, and
neglect it not that I may confide in thee. By its aid thou shalt see
with thine own eyes and not through the eyes of others, and shalt
know of thine own knowledge and not through the knowledge of thy
neighbor. Ponder this in thy heart; how it behooveth thee to be.
Verily justice is My gift to thee and the sign of My loving-kindness.
Set it then before thine eyes.</p>

<p>O Son of Being!<lb />Love Me that I may love thee. If thou
lovest Me not, My love can in no wise reach thee. Know this, O
servant.</p>

<p>O Son of Man!<lb />Sorrow not save that thou art far from
Us. Rejoice not save that thou art drawing near and returning unto
Us.</p>

<p>O Son of Being!<lb />With the hands of
power I made thee and with the fingers of strength I created thee;
and within thee have I placed the essence of My light. Be thou
content with it and seek naught else, for My work is perfect and My
command is binding. Question it not, nor have a doubt thereof.<note place="foot"><p>Bahá’u’lláh,
The Hidden Words of Bahá’u’lláh (Wilmette:
Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1985), Arabic 2 on pp.
3–4, Arabic 5 on p. 4, Arabic 35 on p. 12, Arabic 12 on p. 6.
</p>
<p>Except where the context makes it obvious, the
conventional use of the English word “man” translates
the concept of “humanity”.</p></note></p>

<p>The second of the two major works composed by
Bahá’u’lláh during this period is The Book
of Certitude, a comprehensive exposition of the nature and purpose of
religion. In passages that draw not only on the Qur’án,
but with equal facility and insight on the Old and New Testaments,
the Messengers of God are depicted as agents of a single, unbroken
process, the awakening of the human race to its spiritual and moral
potentialities. A humanity which has come of age can respond to a
directness of teaching that goes beyond the language of parable and
allegory; faith is a matter not of blind belief, but of conscious
knowledge. Nor is the guidance of an ecclesiastical elite any longer
required: the gift of reason confers on each individual in this new
age of enlightenment and education the capacity to respond to Divine
guidance. The test is that of sincerity:</p>

<p>No man shall attain the shores of the ocean of true
understanding except he be detached from all that is in heaven and on
earth.... The essence of these words is this: they that tread the
path of faith, they that thirst for the wine of certitude, must
cleanse themselves of all that is earthly--their ears from idle
talk, their minds from vain imaginings, their hearts from worldly
affections, their eyes from that which perisheth. They should put
their trust in God, and, holding fast unto Him, follow in His way.
Then will they be made worthy of the effulgent glories of the sun of
divine knowledge and understanding, ... inasmuch as man can never
hope to attain unto the knowledge of the All-Glorious ... unless and
until he ceases to regard the words and deeds of mortal men as a
standard for the true understanding and recognition of God and His
Prophets.</p>

<p>Consider the past. How many, both high and low, have, at
all times, yearningly awaited the advent of the Manifestations of God
in the sanctified persons of His chosen Ones.... And whensoever the
portals of grace did open, and the clouds of divine bounty did rain
upon mankind, and the light of the Unseen did shine above the horizon
of celestial might, they all denied Him, and turned away from His
face--the face of God Himself....</p>

<p>Only when the lamp of search, of earnest striving, of
longing desire, of passionate devotion, of fervid love, of rapture,
and ecstasy, is kindled within the seeker’s heart, and the
breeze of His loving-kindness is wafted upon his soul, will the
darkness of error be dispelled, the mists of doubts and misgivings be
dissipated, and the lights of knowledge and certitude envelop his
being.... Then will the manifold favors and outpouring grace of the
holy and everlasting Spirit confer such new life upon the seeker that
he will find himself endowed with a new eye, a new ear, a new heart,
and a new mind.... Gazing with the eye of God, he will perceive
within every atom a door that leadeth him to the stations of absolute
certitude. He will discover in all things the ... evidences of an
everlasting Manifestation.</p>

<p>When the channel of the human soul is cleansed of all
worldly and impeding attachments, it will unfailingly perceive the
breath of the Beloved across immeasurable distances, and will, led by
its perfume, attain and enter the City of Certitude....</p>

<p>That city is none other than the Word
of God revealed in every age and dispensation.... All the guidance,
the blessings, the learning, the understanding, the faith, and
certitude, conferred upon all that is in heaven and on earth, are
hidden and treasured within these Cities.<note place="foot"><p>Certitude,
pp. 3–4, pp. 195–200.</p></note></p>

<p>No overt reference is made to Bahá’u’lláh’s
own as yet unannounced mission; rather, The Book of Certitude is
organized around a vigorous exposition of the mission of the martyred
Báb. Not the least of the reasons for the book’s
powerful influence on the Bábí community, which
included a number of scholars and former seminarians, was the mastery
of Islamic thought and teaching its author displays in demonstrating
the Báb’s claim to have fulfilled the prophecies of
Islam. Calling on the Bábís to be worthy of the trust
which the Báb had placed in them and of the sacrifice of so
many heroic lives, Bahá’u’lláh held out
before them the challenge not only of bringing their personal lives
into conformity with the Divine teachings, but of making their
community a model for the heterogeneous population of Baghdad, the
Iraqi provincial capital.</p>

<p>Though living in very straitened material circumstances,
the exiles were galvanized by this vision. One of their company, a
man called Nabíl, who was later to leave a detailed history of
both the ministries of the Báb and Bahá’u’lláh,
has described the spiritual intensity of those days:</p>

<p>Many a night no less than ten persons
subsisted on no more than a pennyworth of dates. No one knew to whom
actually belonged the shoes, the cloaks, or the robes that were to be
found in their houses. Whoever went to the bazaar could claim that
the shoes upon his feet were his own, and each one who entered the
presence of Bahá’u’lláh could affirm that
the cloak and robe he then wore belonged to him.... O, for the joy of
those days, and the gladness and wonder of those hours!<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in God Passes By, p. 137.</p></note></p>

<p>To the dismay of the Persian consular authorities who
had believed the Bábí “episode” to have run
its course, the community of exiles gradually became a respected and
influential element in Iraq’s provincial capital and the
neighboring towns. Since several of the most important shrines of
Shi‘ih Islam were located in the area, a steady stream of
Persian pilgrims was also exposed, under the most favorable
circumstances, to the renewal of Bábí influence. Among
dignitaries who called on Bahá’u’lláh in
the simple house He occupied were princes of the royal family. So
enchanted by the experience was one of them that he conceived the
somewhat naive idea that by erecting a duplicate of the building in
the gardens of his own estate, he might recapture something of the
atmosphere of spiritual purity and detachment he had briefly
encountered. Another, more deeply moved by the experience of his
visit, expressed to friends the feeling that “were all the
sorrows of the world to be crowded into my heart they would, I feel,
all vanish, when in the presence of Bahá’u’lláh.
It is as if I had entered Paradise...”<note place="foot"><p>Quotation
from Prince Zaynu’l-Ábidín <hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Kh</hi>án,
God Passes By, p. 135.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>The Declaration in the Ridván
Garden</head>

<p>By 1863, Bahá’u’lláh concluded
that the time had come to begin acquainting some of those around Him
with the mission which had been entrusted to Him in the darkness of
the Síyáh-<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Ch</hi>ál. This decision coincided
with a new stage in the campaign of opposition to His work, which had
been relentlessly pursued by the Shi‘ih Muslim clergy and
representatives of the Persian government. Fearing that the acclaim
which Bahá’u’lláh was beginning to enjoy
among influential Persian visitors to Iraq would re-ignite popular
enthusiasm in Persia, the Shah’s government pressed the Ottoman
authorities to remove Him far from the borders and into the interior
of the empire. Eventually, the Turkish government acceded to these
pressures and invited the exile, as its guest, to make His residence
in the capital, Constantinople. Despite the courteous terms in which
the message was couched, the intention was clearly to require
compliance.<note place="foot"><p>A
combination of unusual circumstances had made the central
authorities in Constantinople especially sympathetic to Bahá’u’lláh,
and resistant to pressure from the Persian government. The governor
of Baghdad, Námiq Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á, had written
enthusiastically to the capital about both the character and
influence of the distinguished Persian exile. Sulṭán
‘Abdu’l-‘Azíz found the reports intriguing
because, although he was Caliph of Sunni Islam, he considered
himself a mystical seeker. Equally important, in another way, was
the reaction of his chief minister, ‘Alí Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á.
To the latter, who was an accomplished student of Persian language
and literature as well as a would-be modernizer of the Turkish
administration, Bahá’u’lláh seemed a
highly sympathetic figure. It was no doubt this combination of
sympathy and interest which led the Ottoman government to invite
Bahá’u’lláh to the capital rather than
send Him to a more remote center or deliver Him to the Persian
authorities, as the latter were urging.</p></note></p>

<p>By this time, the devotion of the little company of
exiles had come to focus on Bahá’u’lláh’s
person as well as on His exposition of the Báb’s
teachings. A growing number of them had become convinced that He was
speaking not only as the Báb’s advocate, but on behalf
of the far greater cause which the latter had declared to be
imminent. These beliefs became a certainty in late April 1863 when
Bahá’u’lláh, on the eve of His departure
for Constantinople, called together individuals among His companions,
in a garden to which was later given the name Ridván
(“Paradise”), and confided the central fact of His
mission. Over the next four years, although no open announcement was
considered timely, the hearers gradually shared with trusted friends
the news that the Báb’s promises had been fulfilled and
that the “Day of God” had dawned.</p>

<p>The precise circumstances surrounding this private
communication are, in the words of the Bahá’í
authority most intimately familiar with the records of the period,
“shrouded in an obscurity which future historians will find it
difficult to penetrate.”<note place="foot"><p>God
Passes By, p. 153. Increasingly, after 1863, the word “Bahá’í”
replaced “Bábí” as the designation for the
new faith, marking the fact that an entirely new religion had
emerged.</p></note>
The nature of the declaration may be appreciated in various
references which Bahá’u’lláh was to make to
His mission in many of His subsequent writings:</p>

<p>The purpose underlying all creation
is the revelation of this most sublime, this most holy Day, the Day
known as the Day of God, in His Books and Scriptures--the Day
which all the Prophets, and the Chosen Ones, and the holy ones, have
wished to witness.<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Shoghi Effendi, The Advent of Divine Justice (Wilmette: Bahá’í
Publishing Trust, 1984), p. 77.</p></note></p>

<p>...this is the Day in which mankind
can behold the Face, and hear the Voice, of the Promised One. The
Call of God hath been raised, and the light of His countenance hath
been lifted up upon men. It behooveth every man to blot out the trace
of every idle word from the tablet of his heart, and to gaze, with an
open and unbiased mind, on the signs of His Revelation, the proofs of
His Mission, and the tokens of His glory.<note place="foot"><p>Bahá’u’lláh,
Gleanings from the Writings of Bahá’u’lláh
(Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1983), pp.
10–11.</p></note></p>

<p>As repeatedly emphasized in Bahá’u’lláh’s
exposition of the Báb’s message, the primary purpose of
God in revealing His will is to effect a transformation in the
character of humankind, to develop within those who respond the moral
and spiritual qualities that are latent within human nature:</p>

<p>Beautify your tongues, O people, with
truthfulness, and adorn your souls with the ornament of honesty.
Beware, O people, that ye deal not treacherously with any one. Be ye
the trustees of God amongst His creatures, and the emblems of His
generosity amidst His people....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 297.</p></note></p>

<p>Illumine and hallow your hearts; let
them not be profaned by the thorns of hate or the thistles of malice.
Ye dwell in one world, and have been created through the operation of
one Will. Blessed is he who mingleth with all men in a spirit of
utmost kindliness and love.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 334.</p></note></p>

<p>The aggressive proselytism that had characterized
efforts in ages past to promote the cause of religion is declared to
be unworthy of the Day of God. Each person who has recognized the
Revelation has the obligation to share it with those who he believes
are seeking, but to leave the response entirely to his hearers:</p>

<p>Show forbearance and benevolence and
love to one another. Should any one among you be incapable of
grasping a certain truth, or be striving to comprehend it, show
forth, when conversing with him, a spirit of extreme kindliness and
good-will....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 8.</p></note></p>

<p>The whole duty of man in this Day is
to attain that share of the flood of grace which God poureth forth
for him. Let none, therefore, consider the largeness or smallness of
the receptacle....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 8.</p></note></p>

<p>Against the background of the bloody events in Persia,
Bahá’u’lláh not only told His followers
that “if ye be slain, it is better for you than to slay,”
but urged them to set an example of obedience to civil authority: “In
every country where any of this people reside, they must behave
towards the government of that country with loyalty, honesty and
truthfulness.”<note place="foot"><p>The
two statements quoted may be found cited by ‘Abdu’l-Bahá
in J. E. Esslemont, Bahá’u’lláh and the
New Era (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust
1987), p. 170 and Tablets of Bahá’u’lláh
Revealed after the Kitáb-i-Aqdas (Haifa: Bahá’í
World Centre, 1982), pp. 22–23, respectively.</p></note></p>

<p>The conditions surrounding Bahá’u’lláh’s
departure from Baghdad provided a dramatic demonstration of the
potency of these principles. In only a few years, a band of foreign
exiles whose arrival in the area had aroused suspicion and aversion
on the part of their neighbors had become one of the most respected
and influential segments of the population. They supported themselves
through flourishing businesses; as a group they were admired for
their generosity and the integrity of their conduct; the lurid
allegations of religious fanaticism and violence, sedulously spread
by Persian consular officials and members of the Shi‘ih Muslim
clergy, had ceased to have an effect on the public mind. By May 3,
1863, when He rode out of Baghdad, accompanied by His family and
those of His companions and servants who had been chosen to accompany
Him to Constantinople, Bahá’u’lláh had
become an immensely popular and cherished figure. In the days
immediately preceding the leave-taking a stream of notables,
including the Governor of the province himself, came to the garden
where He had temporarily taken up residence, many of them from great
distances, in order to pay their respects. Eyewitnesses to the
departure have described in moving terms the acclaim that greeted
Him, the tears of many of the onlookers, and the concern of the
Ottoman authorities and civil officials to do their visitor honor.<note place="foot"><p>God
Passes By, pp. 127–57, gives an account of these events.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>“The Changeless Faith of
God...”</head>

<p>Following the declaration of His mission in 1863,
Bahá’u’lláh began to elaborate a theme
already introduced in The Book of Certitude, the relationship between
the Will of God and the evolutionary process by which the spiritual
and moral capacities latent in human nature find expression. This
exposition would occupy a central place in His writings over the
remaining thirty years of His life. The reality of God, He asserts,
is and will always remain unknowable. Whatever words human thought
may apply to the Divine nature relate only to human existence and are
the products of human efforts to describe human experience:</p>

<p>Far, far from Thy glory be what
mortal man can affirm of Thee, or attribute unto Thee, or the praise
with which he can glorify Thee! Whatever duty Thou hast prescribed
unto Thy servants of extolling to the utmost Thy majesty and glory is
but a token of Thy grace unto them, that they may be enabled to
ascend unto the station conferred upon their own inmost being, the
station of the knowledge of their own selves.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 4–5.</p></note></p>

<p>To every discerning and illumined
heart it is evident that God, the unknowable Essence, the divine
Being, is immensely exalted beyond every human attribute, such as
corporeal existence, ascent and descent, egress and regress. Far be
it from His glory that human tongue should adequately recount His
praise, or that human heart comprehend His fathomless mystery. He is
and hath ever been veiled in the ancient eternity of His Essence, and
will remain in His Reality everlastingly hidden from the sight of
men....<note place="foot"><p>Certitude,
p. 98.</p></note></p>

<p>What humanity experiences in turning to the Creator of
all existence are the attributes or qualities which are associated
with God’s recurring Revelations:</p>

<p>The door of the knowledge of the
Ancient of Days being thus closed in the face of all beings, the
Source of infinite grace, ... hath caused those luminous Gems of
Holiness to appear out of the realm of the spirit, in the noble form
of the human temple, and be made manifest unto all men, that they may
impart unto the world the mysteries of the unchangeable Being, and
tell of the subtleties of His imperishable Essence....<note place="foot"><p>Certitude,
p. 99.</p></note></p>

<p>These sanctified Mirrors ... are one
and all the Exponents on earth of Him Who is the central Orb of the
universe, its Essence and ultimate Purpose. From Him proceed their
knowledge and power; from Him is derived their sovereignty. The
beauty of their countenance is but a reflection of His image, and
their revelation a sign of His deathless glory....<note place="foot"><p>Certitude,
pp. 99–100.</p></note></p>

<p>The Revelations of God do not differ in any essential
respect from one another, although the changing needs they serve from
age to age have called out unique responses from each of them:</p>

<p>These attributes of God are not and
have never been vouchsafed specially unto certain Prophets, and
withheld from others. Nay, all the Prophets of God, His well-favored,
His holy, and chosen Messengers, are, without exception, the bearers
of His names, and the embodiments of His attributes. They only differ
in the intensity of their revelation, and the comparative potency of
their light....<note place="foot"><p>Certitude,
pp. 103–4.</p></note></p>

<p>Students of religion are cautioned not to permit
theological dogmas or other preconceptions to lead them into
discriminating among those whom God has used as channels of His
light:</p>

<p>Beware, O believers in the Unity of
God, lest ye be tempted to make any distinction between any of the
Manifestations of His Cause, or to discriminate against the signs
that have accompanied and proclaimed their Revelation. This indeed is
the true meaning of Divine Unity, if ye be of them that apprehend and
believe this truth. Be ye assured, moreover, that the works and acts
of each and every one of these Manifestations of God, nay whatever
pertaineth unto them, and whatsoever they may manifest in the future,
are all ordained by God, and are a reflection of His Will and
Purpose....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 59.</p></note></p>

<p>Bahá’u’lláh compares the
interventions of the Divine Revelations to the return of spring. The
Messengers of God are not merely teachers, although this is one of
their primary functions. Rather, the spirit of their words, together
with the example of their lives, has the capacity to tap the roots of
human motivation and to induce fundamental and lasting change. Their
influence opens new realms of understanding and achievement:</p>

<p>And since there can be no tie of
direct intercourse to bind the one true God with His creation, and no
resemblance whatever can exist between the transient and the Eternal,
the contingent and the Absolute, He hath ordained that in every age
and dispensation a pure and stainless Soul be made manifest in the
kingdoms of earth and heaven.... Led by the light of unfailing
guidance, and invested with supreme sovereignty, They [the Messengers
of God] are commissioned to use the inspiration of Their words, the
effusions of Their infallible grace and the sanctifying breeze of
Their Revelation for the cleansing of every longing heart and
receptive spirit from the dross and dust of earthly cares and
limitations. Then, and only then, will the Trust of God, latent in
the reality of man, emerge ... and implant the ensign of its revealed
glory upon the summits of men’s hearts.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 66–67.</p></note></p>

<p>Without this intervention from the world of God, human
nature remains the captive of instinct, as well as of unconscious
assumptions and patterns of behavior that have been culturally
determined:</p>

<p>Having created the world and all that liveth and moveth
therein, He [God] ... chose to confer upon man the unique distinction
and capacity to know Him and to love Him--a capacity that must
needs be regarded as the generating impulse and the primary purpose
underlying the whole of creation.... Upon the inmost reality of each
and every created thing He hath shed the light of one of His names,
and made it a recipient of the glory of one of His attributes. Upon
the reality of man, however, He hath focused the radiance of all of
His names and attributes, and made it a mirror of His own Self. Alone
of all created things man hath been singled out for so great a favor,
so enduring a bounty.</p>

<p>These energies with which the ...
Source of heavenly guidance hath endowed the reality of man lie,
however, latent within him, even as the flame is hidden within the
candle and the rays of light are potentially present in the lamp. The
radiance of these energies may be obscured by worldly desires even as
the light of the sun can be concealed beneath the dust and dross
which cover the mirror. Neither the candle nor the lamp can be
lighted through their own unaided efforts, nor can it ever be
possible for the mirror to free itself from its dross. It is clear
and evident that until a fire is kindled the lamp will never be
ignited, and unless the dross is blotted out from the face of the
mirror it can never represent the image of the sun nor reflect its
light and glory.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 65–66.</p></note></p>

<p>The time has come, Bahá’u’lláh
said, when humanity has both the capacity and the opportunity to see
the entire panorama of its spiritual development as a single process:
“Peerless is this Day, for it is as the eye to past ages and
centuries, and as a light unto the darkness of the times.”<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Advent, p. 79.</p></note>
In this perspective, the followers of differing religious traditions
must strive to understand what He called “the changeless Faith
of God”<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 136.</p></note>
and to distinguish its central spiritual impulse from the changing
laws and concepts that were revealed to meet the requirements of an
ever-evolving human society:</p>

<p>The Prophets of God should be
regarded as physicians whose task is to foster the well-being of the
world and its peoples, that, through the spirit of oneness, they may
heal the sickness of a divided humanity.... Little wonder, then, if
the treatment prescribed by the physician in this day should not be
found to be identical with that which he prescribed before. How could
it be otherwise when the ills affecting the sufferer necessitate at
every stage of his sickness a special remedy? In like manner, every
time the Prophets of God have illumined the world with the
resplendent radiance of the Day Star of Divine knowledge, they have
invariably summoned its peoples to embrace the light of God through
such means as best befitted the exigencies of the age in which they
appeared....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 80.</p></note></p>

<p>It is not only the heart, but the mind, which must
devote itself to this process of discovery. Reason, Bahá’u’lláh
asserts, is God’s greatest gift to the soul, “a sign of
the revelation of ... the sovereign Lord.”<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 164.</p></note>
Only by freeing itself from inherited dogma, whether religious or
materialistic, can the mind take up an independent exploration of the
relationship between the Word of God and the experience of humankind.
In such a search, a major obstacle is prejudice: “Warn ... the
beloved of the one true God, not to view with too critical an eye the
sayings and writings of men. Let them rather approach such sayings
and writings in a spirit of open-mindedness and loving sympathy.”<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 329.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>The Manifestation of God</head>

<p>What is common to all who are devoted to one or another
of the world’s religious systems is the conviction that it is
through the Divine Revelation that the soul comes in touch with the
world of God, and that it is this relationship which gives real
meaning to life. Some of the most important passages in Bahá’u’lláh’s
writings are those which discuss at length the nature and role of
those who are the channels of this Revelation, the Messengers or
“Manifestations of God.” A recurrent analogy found in
these passages is that of the physical sun. While the latter shares
certain characteristics of the other bodies in the solar system, it
differs from them in that it is, in itself, the source of the
system’s light. The planets and moons reflect light whereas the
sun emits it as an attribute inseparable from its nature. The system
revolves around this focal point, each of its members influenced not
only by its particular composition, but by its relationship to the
source of the system’s light.<note place="foot"><p>For
a detailed exposition of this subject see ‘Abdu’l-Bahá,
Some Answered Questions (Wilmette: Bahá’í
Publishing Trust, 1970), pp. 163–201.</p></note></p>

<p>In the same way, Bahá’u’lláh
asserts, the human personality which the Manifestation of God shares
with the rest of the race is differentiated from others in a way that
fits it to serve as the channel or vehicle for the Revelation of God.
Apparently contradictory references to this dual station, attributed,
for example, to Christ,<note place="foot"><p>Examples,
in the words of Jesus, are “Why callest thou me good? There is
none good but one, that is, God...” (Matthew 19:17); “I
and my Father are one.” (John 10:30)</p></note>
have been among the many sources of religious confusion and
dissension throughout history. Bahá’u’lláh
says on the subject:</p>

<p>Whatever is in the heavens and
whatever is on the earth is a direct evidence of the revelation
within it of the attributes and names of God ... To a supreme degree
is this true of man, who, among all created things, ... hath been
singled out for the glory of such distinction. For in him are
potentially revealed all the attributes and names of God to a degree
that no other created being hath excelled or surpassed.... And of all
men, the most accomplished, the most distinguished, and the most
excellent are the Manifestations of the Sun of Truth. Nay, all else
besides these Manifestations, live by the operation of their Will,
and move and have their being through the outpourings of their
grace.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 177–79.</p></note></p>

<p>Throughout history, the conviction of believers that the
Founder of their own religion occupied a unique station has had the
effect of stimulating intense speculation on the nature of the
Manifestation of God. Such speculation has, however, been severely
hampered by the difficulties of interpreting and resolving the
allegorical allusions in past scriptures. The attempt to crystallize
opinion in the form of religious dogma has been a divisive rather
than unifying force in history. Indeed, despite the enormous energy
devoted to theological pursuits--or perhaps because of it--there
are today profound differences among Muslims as to the precise
station of Muḥammad, among Christians as to that of Jesus, and
among Buddhists with respect to the Founder of their own religion. As
is all too apparent, the controversies created by these and other
differences within any one given tradition have proven at least as
acute as those separating that tradition from its sister faiths.</p>

<p>Particularly important to an understanding of
Bahá’u’lláh’s teachings on the unity
of religions, therefore, are His statements about the station of the
successive Messengers of God and the functions performed by them in
the spiritual history of humankind:</p>

<p>[The] Manifestations of God have each a twofold station.
One is the station of pure abstraction and essential unity. In this
respect, if thou callest them all by one name, and dost ascribe to
them the same attributes, thou hast not erred from the truth....</p>

<p>The other station is the station of distinction, and
pertaineth to the world of creation, and to the limitations thereof.
In this respect, each Manifestation of God hath a distinct
individuality, a definitely prescribed mission, a predestined
revelation, and specially designated limitations. Each one of them is
known by a different name, is characterized by a special attribute,
fulfills a definite mission...</p>

<p>Viewed in the light of their second station ... they
manifest absolute servitude, utter destitution, and complete
self-effacement. Even as He saith: “I am the servant of God. I
am but a man like you.”...</p>

<p>Were any of the all-embracing
Manifestations of God to declare: “I am God,” He, verily,
speaketh the truth, and no doubt attacheth thereto. For ... through
their Revelation, their attributes and names, the Revelation of God,
His names and His attributes, are made manifest in the world.... And
were any of them to voice the utterance, “I am the Messenger of
God,” He, also, speaketh the truth, the indubitable truth....
Viewed in this light, they are all but Messengers of that ideal King,
that unchangeable Essence.... And were they to say, “We are the
Servants of God,” this also is a manifest and indisputable
fact. For they have been made manifest in the uttermost state of
servitude, a servitude the like of which no man can possibly
attain....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 54, 55.</p></note></p>

<p>Thus it is that whatsoever be their
utterance, whether it pertain to the realm of Divinity, Lordship,
Prophethood, Messengership, Guardianship, Apostleship, or Servitude,
all is true, beyond the shadow of a doubt. Therefore these sayings
... must be attentively considered, that the divergent utterances of
the Manifestations of the Unseen and Day Springs of Holiness may
cease to agitate the soul and perplex the mind.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 56.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>“An
Ever-Advancing Civilization...”</head>

<p>Implicit in these paragraphs is a perspective which
represents the most challenging feature of Bahá’u’lláh’s
exposition of the function of the Manifestation of God. Divine
Revelation is, He says, the motive power of civilization. When it
occurs, its transforming effect on the minds and souls of those who
respond to it is replicated in the new society that slowly takes
shape around their experience. A new center of loyalty emerges that
can win the commitment of peoples from the widest range of cultures;
music and the arts seize on symbols that mediate far richer and more
mature inspirations; a radical redefinition of concepts of right and
wrong makes possible the formulation of new codes of civil law and
conduct; new institutions are conceived in order to give expression
to impulses of moral responsibility previously ignored or unknown:
“He was in the world, and the world was made by him...”<note place="foot"><p>New
Testament, John 1:10.</p></note>
As the new culture evolves into a civilization, it assimilates
achievements and insights of past eras in a multitude of fresh
permutations. Features of past cultures that cannot be incorporated
atrophy or are taken up by marginal elements among the population.
The Word of God creates new possibilities within both the individual
consciousness and human relationships.</p>

<p>Every word that proceedeth out of the
mouth of God is endowed with such potency as can instill new life
into every human frame... All the wondrous works ye behold in this
world have been manifested through the operation of His supreme and
most exalted Will, His wondrous and inflexible Purpose.... No sooner
is this resplendent word uttered, than its animating energies,
stirring within all created things, give birth to the means and
instruments whereby such arts can be produced and perfected.... In
the days to come, ye will, verily, behold things of which ye have
never heard before.... Every single letter proceeding out of the
mouth of God is indeed a mother letter, and every word uttered by Him
Who is the Well Spring of Divine Revelation is a mother word....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 141–42.</p></note></p>

<p>The sequence of the Divine Revelations, the Báb
asserts, is “a process that hath had no beginning and will have
no end.”<note place="foot"><p>Shoghi
Effendi, The World Order of Bahá’u’lláh:
Selected Letters (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing
Trust, 1982), p. 117.</p></note>
Although the mission of each of the Manifestations is limited in time
and in the functions it performs, it is an integral part of an
ongoing and progressive unfoldment of God’s power and will:</p>

<p>Contemplate with thine inward eye the
chain of successive Revelations that hath linked the Manifestation of
Adam with that of the Báb. I testify before God that each one
of these Manifestations hath been sent down through the operation of
the Divine Will and Purpose, that each hath been the bearer of a
specific Message, that each hath been entrusted with a divinely
revealed Book... The measure of the Revelation with which every one
of them hath been identified had been definitely foreordained....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 74. In the Bahá’í writings the term “Adam”
is used symbolically in two different senses. The one refers to the
emergence of the human race, while the other designates the first of
the Manifestations of God.</p></note></p>

<p>Eventually, as an ever-evolving civilization exhausts
its spiritual sources, a process of disintegration sets in, as it
does throughout the phenomenal world. Turning again to analogies
offered by nature, Bahá’u’lláh compares
this hiatus in the development of civilization to the onset of
winter. Moral vitality diminishes, as does social cohesion.
Challenges which would have been overcome at an earlier age, or been
turned into opportunities for exploration and achievement, become
insuperable barriers. Religion loses its relevance, and
experimentation becomes increasingly fragmented, further deepening
social divisions. Increasingly, uncertainty about the meaning and
value of life generates anxiety and confusion. Speaking about this
condition in our own age Bahá’u’lláh says:</p>

<p>We can well perceive how the whole
human race is encompassed with great, with incalculable afflictions.
We see it languishing on its bed of sickness, sore-tried and
disillusioned. They that are intoxicated by self-conceit have
interposed themselves between it and the Divine and infallible
Physician. Witness how they have entangled all men, themselves
included, in the mesh of their devices. They can neither discover the
cause of the disease, nor have they any knowledge of the remedy. They
have conceived the straight to be crooked, and have imagined their
friend an enemy.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 213.</p></note></p>

<p>When each of the Divine impulses has fulfilled itself,
the process recurs. A new Manifestation of God appears with the
fuller measure of Divine inspiration for the next stage in the
awakening and civilizing of humankind:</p>

<p>Consider the hour at which the
supreme Manifestation of God revealeth Himself unto men. Ere that
hour cometh, the Ancient Being, Who is still unknown of men and hath
not as yet given utterance to the Word of God, is Himself the
All-Knower in a world devoid of any man that hath known Him. He is
indeed the Creator without a creation.... This is indeed the Day of
which it hath been written: “Whose shall be the Kingdom this
Day?” And none can be found ready to answer!<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 151.</p></note></p>

<p>Until a section of humanity begins to respond to the new
Revelation, and a new spiritual and social paradigm begins to take
shape, people subsist spiritually and morally on the last traces of
earlier Divine endowments. The routine tasks of society may or may
not be done; laws may be obeyed or flouted; social and political
experimentation may flame up or fail; but the roots of faith--without
which no society can indefinitely endure--have been exhausted.
At the “end of the age,” at the “end of the world,”
the spiritually minded begin to turn again to the Creative source.
However clumsy or disturbing the process may be, however inelegant or
unfortunate some of the options considered, such searching is an
instinctive response to the awareness that an immense chasm has
opened in the ordered life of humankind.<note place="foot"><p>See
Bahá’u’lláh, The Seven Valleys and The
Four Valleys (Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust,
1986), pp. 6–7: “Yea, although to the wise it be
shameful to seek the Lord of Lords in the dust, yet this betokeneth
intense ardor in searching.”</p></note>
The effects of the new Revelation, Bahá’u’lláh
says, are universal, and not limited to the life and teachings of the
Manifestation of God Who is the Revelation’s focal point.
Though not understood, these effects increasingly permeate human
affairs, revealing the contradictions in popular assumptions and in
society, and intensifying the search for understanding.</p>

<p>The succession of the Manifestations is an inseparable
dimension of existence, Bahá’u’lláh
declares, and will continue throughout the life of the world: “God
hath sent down His Messengers to succeed to Moses and Jesus, and He
will continue to do so till ‘the end that hath no end’...”<note place="foot"><p>World
Order, p. 116.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>The Day of God</head>

<p>What does Bahá’u’lláh hold to
be the goal of the evolution of human consciousness? In the
perspective of eternity, its purpose is that God should see, ever
more clearly, the reflection of His perfections in the mirror of His
creation, and that, in the words of Bahá’u’lláh:</p>

<p>...every man may testify, in himself,
by himself, in the station of the Manifestation of his Lord, that
verily there is no God save Him, and that every man may thereby win
his way to the summit of realities, until none shall contemplate
anything whatsoever but that he shall see God therein.<note place="foot"><p>Seven
Valleys, pp. 1–2.</p></note></p>

<p>Within the context of the history of civilization, the
objective of the succession of divine Manifestations has been to
prepare human consciousness for the race’s unification as a
single species, indeed as a single organism capable of taking up the
responsibility for its collective future: “He Who is your Lord,
the All-Merciful,” Bahá’u’lláh says,
“cherisheth in His heart the desire of beholding the entire
human race as one soul and one body.”<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 214.</p></note>
Not until humanity has accepted its organic oneness can it meet even
its immediate challenges, let alone those that lie ahead: “The
well-being of mankind,” Bahá’u’lláh
insists, “its peace and security, are unattainable unless and
until its unity is firmly established.”<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 286.</p></note>
Only a unified global society can provide its children with the sense
of inner assurance implied in one of Bahá’u’lláh’s
prayers to God: “Whatever duty Thou hast prescribed unto Thy
servants of extolling to the utmost Thy majesty and glory is but a
token of Thy grace unto them, that they may be enabled to ascend unto
the station conferred upon their own inmost being, the station of the
knowledge of their own selves.”<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 4–5.</p></note>
Paradoxically, it is only by achieving true unity that humanity can
fully cultivate its diversity and individuality. This is the goal
which the missions of all of the Manifestations of God known to
history have served, the Day of “one fold and one shepherd.”<note place="foot"><p>New
Testament, John 10:16.</p></note>
Its attainment, Bahá’u’lláh says, is the
stage of civilization upon which the human race is now entering.</p>

<p>One of the most suggestive analogies to be found in the
writings not only of Bahá’u’lláh, but of
the Báb before Him, is the comparison between the evolution of
the human race and the life of the individual human being. Humanity
has moved through stages in its collective development which are
reminiscent of the periods of infancy, childhood, and adolescence in
the maturation of its individual members. We are now experiencing the
beginnings of our collective maturity, endowed with new capacities
and opportunities of which we as yet have only the dimmest
awareness.<note place="foot"><p>For
elaboration on the subject of Bahá’u’lláh’s
teachings on the process of the maturation of the human race, see
World Order, pp. 162–63, p. 202.</p></note></p>

<p>Against this background, it is not difficult to
understand the primacy given in Bahá’u’lláh’s
teachings to the principle of unity. The oneness of humanity is the
leitmotif of the age now opening, the standard against which must be
tested all proposals for the betterment of humanity. There is,
Bahá’u’lláh insists, but one human race;
inherited notions that a particular racial or ethnic group is in some
way superior to the rest of humanity are without foundation.
Similarly, since all of the Messengers of God have served as agents
of the one Divine Will, their revelations are the collective legacy
of the entire human race; each person on earth is a legitimate heir
of the whole of that spiritual tradition. Persistence in prejudices
of any kind is both damaging to the interests of society and a
violation of the Will of God for our age:</p>

<p>O contending peoples and kindreds of
the earth! Set your faces towards unity, and let the radiance of its
light shine upon you. Gather ye together, and for the sake of God
resolve to root out whatever is the source of contention amongst
you.... There can be no doubt whatever that the peoples of the world,
of whatever race or religion, derive their inspiration from one
heavenly Source, and are the subjects of one God. The difference
between the ordinances under which they abide should be attributed to
the varying requirements and exigencies of the age in which they were
revealed. All of them, except a few which are the outcome of human
perversity, were ordained of God, and are a reflection of His Will
and Purpose. Arise and, armed with the power of faith, shatter to
pieces the gods of your vain imaginings, the sowers of dissension
amongst you....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 217.</p></note></p>

<p>The theme of unity runs throughout Bahá’u’lláh’s
writings: “The tabernacle of unity hath been raised; regard ye
not one another as strangers.”<note place="foot"><p>Tablets,
p. 164.</p></note>
“Consort with the followers of all religions in a spirit of
friendliness and fellowship.”<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 95.</p></note>
“Ye are the fruits of one tree, and the leaves of one branch.”<note place="foot"><p>Tablets,
p. 164.</p></note></p>

<p>The process of humanity’s coming-of-age has
occurred within the evolution of social organization. Beginning from
the family unit and its various extensions, the human race has
developed, with varying degrees of success, societies based on the
clan, the tribe, the city-state, and most recently the nation. This
progressively broader and more complex social milieu provides human
potential with both stimulation and scope for development, and this
development, in turn, has induced ever-new modifications of the
social fabric. Humanity’s coming-of-age, therefore, must entail
a total transformation of the social order. The new society must be
one capable of embracing the entire diversity of the race and of
benefiting from the full range of talents and insights which many
thousands of years of cultural experience have refined:</p>

<p>This is the Day in which God’s
most excellent favors have been poured out upon men, the Day in which
His most mighty grace hath been infused into all created things. It
is incumbent upon all the peoples of the world to reconcile their
differences, and, with perfect unity and peace, abide beneath the
shadow of the Tree of His care and loving-kindness.... Soon will the
present-day order be rolled up, and a new one spread out in its
stead. Verily, thy Lord speaketh the truth, and is the Knower of
things unseen.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 6–7.</p></note></p>

<p>The chief instrument for the transformation of society
and the achievement of world unity, Bahá’u’lláh
asserts, is the establishment of justice in the affairs of humankind.
The subject has a central place in His teachings:</p>

<p>The light of men is Justice. Quench
it not with the contrary winds of oppression and tyranny. The purpose
of justice is the appearance of unity among men. The ocean of divine
wisdom surgeth within this exalted word, while the books of the world
cannot contain its inner significance....<note place="foot"><p>Tablets,
pp. 66–67.</p></note></p>

<p>In His later writings Bahá’u’lláh
made explicit the implications of this principle for the age of
humanity’s maturity. “Women and men have been and will
always be equal in the sight of God,”<note place="foot"><p>Women:
A compilation (Toronto: Bahá’í Publishing Trust,
1986), p. 26.</p></note>
He asserts, and the advancement of civilization requires that society
so organize its affairs as to give full expression to this fact. The
earth’s resources are the property of all humanity, not of any
one people. Different contributions to the common economic welfare
deserve and should receive different measures of reward and
recognition, but the extremes of wealth and poverty which afflict
most nations on earth, regardless of the socio-economic philosophies
they profess, must be abolished.</p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Announcement to the Kings</head>

<p>The writings which have been quoted in the foregoing
were revealed, for the most part, in conditions of renewed
persecution. Soon after the exiles’ arrival in Constantinople,
it became apparent that the honors showered upon Bahá’u’lláh
during His journey from Baghdad had represented only a brief
interlude. The Ottoman authorities’ decision to move the “Bábí”
leader and His companions to the capital of the empire rather than to
some remote province deepened the alarm among the representatives of
the Persian government.<note place="foot"><p>A
combination of unusual circumstances had made the central
authorities in Constantinople especially sympathetic to Bahá’u’lláh,
and resistant to pressure from the Persian government. The governor
of Baghdad, Námiq Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á, had written
enthusiastically to the capital about both the character and
influence of the distinguished Persian exile. Sulṭán
‘Abdu’l-‘Azíz found the reports intriguing
because, although he was Caliph of Sunni Islam, he considered
himself a mystical seeker. Equally important, in another way, was
the reaction of his chief minister, ‘Alí Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á.
To the latter, who was an accomplished student of Persian language
and literature as well as a would-be modernizer of the Turkish
administration, Bahá’u’lláh seemed a
highly sympathetic figure. It was no doubt this combination of
sympathy and interest which led the Ottoman government to invite
Bahá’u’lláh to the capital rather than
send Him to a more remote center or deliver Him to the Persian
authorities, as the latter were urging.</p></note>
Fearing that the developments in Baghdad would be repeated, and might
attract this time not only the sympathy but perhaps even the
allegiance of influential figures in the Turkish government, the
Persian ambassador pressed insistently for the dispatch of the exiles
to some more distant part of the empire. His argument was that the
spread of a new religious message in the capital could produce
political as well as religious repercussions.</p>

<p>Initially, the Ottoman government strongly resisted. The
chief minister, ‘Alí Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á, had
indicated to Western diplomats his belief that Bahá’u’lláh
was “a man of great distinction, exemplary conduct, great
moderation, and a most dignified figure.” His teachings were,
in the minister’s opinion, “worthy of high esteem”
because they counteracted the religious animosities dividing the
Jewish, Christian, and Muslim subjects of the empire.<note place="foot"><p>For
the full text of the report of the Austrian ambassador, Count von
Prokesch-Osten, in a letter to the Comte de Gobineau, January 10,
1886, see Bábí and Bahá’í
Religions, pp. 186–87.</p></note></p>

<p>Gradually, however, a degree of resentment and suspicion
developed. In the Ottoman capital, political and economic power was
in the hands of court functionaries who, with but few exceptions,
were persons of little or no competence. Venality was the oil on
which the machinery of government operated, and the capital was a
magnet for a horde of people who flocked there from every part of the
empire and beyond, seeking favors and influence. It was expected that
any prominent figure from another country or from one of the tribute
territories would, immediately upon arrival in Constantinople, join
the throngs of patronage-seekers in the reception rooms of the pashas
and ministers of the imperial court. No element had a worse
reputation than the competing groups of Persian political exiles who
were known for both their sophistication and their lack of scruple.</p>

<p>To the distress of friends who urged Him to make use of
the prevailing hostility toward the Persian government and of the
sympathy which His own sufferings had aroused, Bahá’u’lláh
made it clear that He had no requests to make. Although several
government ministers made social calls at the residence assigned to
Him, he did not take advantage of these openings. He was in
Constantinople, He said, as the guest of the Sultan, at his
invitation, and His interest lay in spiritual and moral concerns.</p>

<p>Many years later, the Persian ambassador, Mírzá
Ḥusayn <hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Kh</hi>án, reflecting on his tour of duty in
the Ottoman capital, and complaining about the damage which the greed
and untrustworthiness of his countrymen had done to Persia’s
reputation in Constantinople, paid a surprisingly candid tribute to
the example which Bahá’u’lláh’s
conduct had been able briefly to set.<note place="foot"><p>Revelation,
Vol. 2, p. 399.</p></note>
At the time, however, he and his colleagues made use of the situation
to represent it as an astute way on the exile’s part of
concealing secret conspiracies against public security and the
religion of the State. Under pressure of these influences, the
Ottoman authorities finally took the decision to transfer Bahá’u’lláh
and His family to the provincial city of Adrianople. The move was
made hastily, in the depth of an extremely severe winter. Housed
there in inadequate buildings, lacking suitable clothing and other
provisions, the exiles endured a year of great suffering. It was
clear that, though charged with no crime and given no opportunity to
defend themselves, they had arbitrarily been made state prisoners.</p>

<p>From the point of view of religious history, the
successive banishments of Bahá’u’lláh to
Constantinople and Adrianople have a striking symbolism. For the
first time, a Manifestation of God, Founder of an independent
religious system which was soon to spread throughout the planet, had
crossed the narrow neck of water separating Asia from Europe, and had
set foot in “the West.” All of the other great religions
had arisen in Asia and the ministries of their Founders had been
confined to that continent. Referring to the fact that the
dispensations of the past, and particularly those of Abraham, Christ,
and Muḥammad, had produced their most important effects on the
development of civilization during the course of their westward
expansion, Bahá’u’lláh predicted that the
same thing would occur in this new age, but on a vastly larger scale:
“In the East the Light of His Revelation hath broken; in the
West the signs of His dominion have appeared. Ponder this in your
hearts, O people...”<note place="foot"><p>Tablets,
p. 13.</p></note></p>

<p>It is then perhaps not surprising that Bahá’u’lláh
chose this moment to make public the mission which had been slowly
enlisting the allegiance of the followers of the Báb
throughout the Middle East. His announcement took the form of a
series of statements which are among the most remarkable documents in
religious history. In them, the Manifestation of God addresses the
“Kings and Rulers of the world,” announcing to them the
dawning of the Day of God, alluding to the as yet inconceivable
changes which were gathering momentum throughout the world, and
calling on them as the trustees of God and of their fellow human
beings to arise and serve the process of the unification of the human
race. Because of the veneration in which they were held by the mass
of their subjects, and because of the absolute nature of the rule
which most of them exercised, it lay in their power, He said, to
assist in bringing about what He called the “Most Great Peace,”
a world order characterized by unity and animated by Divine justice.</p>

<p>Only with the greatest difficulty can the modern reader
envision the moral and intellectual world in which these monarchs of
a century ago lived. From their biographies and private
correspondence, it is apparent that, with few exceptions, they were
personally devout, taking a leading part in the spiritual life of
their respective nations, often as the heads of the state religions,
and convinced of the unerring truths of the Bible or the Qur’án.
The power which most of them wielded they attributed directly to the
divine authority of passages in these same Scriptures, an authority
about which they were vigorously articulate. They were the anointed
of God. Prophecies of “the Latter Days” and “the
Kingdom of God” were not for them myth or allegory, but
certainties upon which all moral order rested and in which they would
themselves be called on by God to give an account of their
stewardship.</p>

<p>The letters of Bahá’u’lláh
address themselves to this mental world:</p>

<p>O Kings of the earth! He Who is the sovereign Lord of
all is come. The Kingdom is God’s, the omnipotent Protector,
the Self-Subsisting.... This is a Revelation to which whatever ye
possess can never be compared, could ye but know it.</p>

<p>Take heed lest pride deter you from
recognizing the Source of Revelation, lest the things of this world
shut you out as by a veil from Him Who is the Creator of heaven....
By the righteousness of God! It is not Our wish to lay hands on your
kingdoms. Our mission is to seize and possess the hearts of men....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 210–12.</p></note></p>

<p>Know ye that the poor are the trust of God in your
midst. Watch that ye betray not His trust, that ye deal not unjustly
with them and that ye walk not in the ways of the treacherous. Ye
will most certainly be called upon to answer for His trust on the day
when the Balance of Justice shall be set, the day when unto every one
shall be rendered his due, when the doings of all men, be they rich
or poor, shall be weighed.</p>

<p>...</p>

<p>Examine Our Cause, inquire into the
things that have befallen Us, and decide justly between Us and Our
enemies, and be ye of them that act equitably towards their neighbor.
If ye stay not the hand of the oppressor, if ye fail to safeguard the
rights of the downtrodden, what right have ye then to vaunt
yourselves among men?<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 251–52.</p></note></p>

<p>If ye pay no heed unto the counsels
which ... We have revealed in this Tablet, Divine chastisement shall
assail you from every direction, and the sentence of His justice
shall be pronounced against you. On that day ye shall have no power
to resist Him, and shall recognize your own impotence....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 252.</p></note></p>

<p>The vision of the “Most Great Peace” evoked
no response from the rulers of the nineteenth century. Nationalistic
aggrandizement and imperial expansion recruited not only kings but
parliamentarians, academics, artists, newspapers, and the major
religious establishments as eager propagandists of Western
triumphalism. Proposals for social change, however disinterested and
idealistic, quickly fell captive to a swarm of new ideologies thrown
up by the rising tide of dogmatic materialism. In the Orient,
mesmerized by its own claims to represent all that humanity ever
could or would know of God and truth, the Islamic world sank steadily
deeper into ignorance, lethargy, and a sullen hostility to a human
race which failed to acknowledge this spiritual preeminence.</p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Arrival in the Holy Land</head>

<p>Given the earlier events in Baghdad, it seems surprising
that the Ottoman authorities did not anticipate what would result
from the establishment of Bahá’u’lláh in
another major provincial capital. Within a year of His arrival in
Adrianople, their prisoner had attracted first the interest and then
the fervent admiration of figures prominent in both the intellectual
and administrative life of the region. To the dismay of the Persian
consular representatives, two of the most devoted of these admirers
were <hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Kh</hi>ur<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>íd Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á, the
Governor of the province, and the <hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Sh</hi>ay<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">kh</hi>u’l-Islám,
the leading Sunni religious dignitary. In the eyes of His hosts and
the public generally, the exile was a moral philosopher and saint the
validity of whose teachings was reflected not only in the example of
His own life but in the changes they effected among the flood of
Persian pilgrims who flocked to this remote center of the Ottoman
Empire in order to visit Him.<note place="foot"><p>For
a description of these events see Revelation, Vol. 3, especially pp.
296, 331.</p></note></p>

<p>These unanticipated developments convinced the Persian
ambassador and his colleagues that it was only a matter of time
before the Bahá’í movement, which was continuing
to spread in Persia, would have established itself as a major
influence in Persia’s neighboring and rival empire. Throughout
this period of its history, the ramshackle Ottoman Empire was
struggling against repeated incursions by Tsarist Russia, uprisings
among its subject peoples, and persistent attempts by the ostensibly
sympathetic British and Austrian governments to detach various
Turkish territories and incorporate them into their own empires.
These unstable political conditions in Turkey’s European
provinces offered new and urgent arguments supporting the
ambassador’s appeal that the exiles be sent to a distant colony
where Bahá’u’lláh would have no further
contact with influential circles, whether Turkish or Western.</p>

<p>When the Turkish foreign minister, Fu’ád
Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á, returned from a visit to Adrianople, his
astonished reports of the reputation which Bahá’u’lláh
had come to enjoy throughout the region appeared to lend credibility
to the Persian embassy’s suggestions. In this climate of
opinion, the government abruptly decided to subject its guest to
strict confinement. Without warning, early one day, Bahá’u’lláh’s
house was surrounded by soldiers, and the exiles were ordered to
prepare for departure to an unknown destination.</p>

<p>The place chosen for this final banishment was the grim
fortress-town of Akká (Acre) on the coast of the Holy Land.
Notorious throughout the empire for the foulness of its climate and
the prevalence of many diseases, Akká was a penal colony used
by the Ottoman State for the incarceration of dangerous criminals who
could be expected not to survive too long their imprisonment there.
Arriving in August 1868, Bahá’u’lláh, the
members of His family, and a company of His followers who had been
exiled with Him were to experience two years of suffering and abuse
within the fortress itself, and then be confined under house arrest
to a nearby building owned by a local merchant. For a long time the
exiles were shunned by the superstitious local populace who had been
warned in public sermons against “the God of the Persians,”
who was depicted as an enemy of public order and the purveyor of
blasphemous and immoral ideas. Several members of the small group of
exiles died of the privations and other conditions to which they were
subjected.<note place="foot"><p>For
a description of this experience see God Passes By, pp. 180–89.</p></note></p>

<p>It seems, in retrospect, the keenest irony that the
selection of the Holy Land as the place of Bahá’u’lláh’s
forced confinement should have been the result of pressure from
ecclesiastical and civil enemies whose aim was to extinguish His
religious influence. Palestine, revered by three of the great
monotheistic religions as the point where the worlds of God and of
man intersect, held then, as it had for thousands of years, a unique
place in human expectation. Only a few weeks before Bahá’u’lláh’s
arrival, the main leadership of the German Protestant Templer
movement sailed from Europe to establish at the foot of Mount Carmel
a colony that would welcome Christ, whose advent they believed to be
imminent. Over the lintels of several of the small houses they
erected, facing across the bay to Bahá’u’lláh’s
prison at Akká, can still be seen such carved inscriptions as
“Der Herr ist nahe” (“The Lord is near”).<note place="foot"><p>In
the 1850s two German religious leaders, Christoph Hoffmann and Georg
David Hardegg, collaborated in the development of the “Society
of Templers,” devoted to creating in the Holy Land a colony or
colonies which would prepare the way for Christ, on His return.
Leaving Germany on August 6, 1868, the founding group arrived in
Haifa on October 30, 1868, two months after Bahá’u’lláh’s
own arrival.</p></note></p>

<p>In Akká, Bahá’u’lláh
continued the dictation of a series of letters to individual rulers,
which He had begun in Adrianople. Several contained warnings of the
judgment of God on their negligence and misrule, warnings whose
dramatic fulfillment aroused intense public discussion throughout the
Near East. Less than two months after the exiles arrived in the
prison-city, for example, Fu’ád Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á,
the Ottoman foreign minister, whose misrepresentations had helped
precipitate the banishment, was abruptly dismissed from his post and
died in France of a heart attack. The event was marked by a statement
which predicted the early dismissal of his colleague, Prime Minister
‘Alí Pá<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">sh</hi>á, the overthrow and death
of the Sultan, and the loss of Turkish territories in Europe, a
series of disasters which followed on the heels of one another.<note place="foot"><p>For
a description of the disasters which befell European Turkey in the
Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78 see Addendum III in King of
Glory, pp. 460–62.</p></note></p>

<p>A letter to Emperor Napoleon III warned that, because of
his insincerity and the misuse of his power: “...thy kingdom
shall be thrown into confusion, and thine empire shall pass from
thine hands, as a punishment for that which thou hast wrought....
Hath thy pomp made thee proud? By My life! It shall not endure...”<note place="foot"><p>Epistle,
p. 51.</p></note>
Of the disastrous Franco-Prussian War and the resulting overthrow of
Napoleon III, which occurred less than a year after this statement,
Alistair Horne, a modern scholar of nineteenth century French
political history has written:</p>

<p>History knows of perhaps no more
startling instance of what the Greeks called peripateia, the terrible
fall from prideful heights. Certainly no nation in modern times, so
replete with apparent grandeur and opulent in material achievement,
has ever been subjected to a worse humiliation in so short a time.<note place="foot"><p>Alistair
Horne, The Fall of Paris (London: Macmillan, 1965), p. 34.</p></note></p>

<p>Only a few months before the unexpected series of events
in Europe that led to the invasion of the Papal States and the
annexation of Rome by the forces of the new Kingdom of Italy, a
statement addressing Pope Pius IX had urged the Pontiff “Abandon
thy kingdom unto the kings, and emerge from thy habitation, with thy
face set towards the Kingdom... Be as thy Lord hath been.... Verily,
the day of ingathering is come, and all things have been separated
from each other. He hath stored away that which He chose in the
vessels of justice, and cast into the fire that which befitteth
it....”<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Shoghi Effendi, The Promised Day Is Come (Wilmette: Bahá’í
Publishing Trust, 1980), pp. 32–33.</p></note></p>

<p>Wilhelm I, King of Prussia, whose armies had won such a
sweeping victory in the Franco-Prussian War, had been warned by
Bahá’u’lláh in the Kitáb-i-Aqdas to
heed the example of the fall of Napoleon III and of other rulers who
had been victorious in war, and not to allow pride to keep him back
from recognizing this Revelation. That Bahá’u’lláh
foresaw the failure of the German Emperor to respond to this warning
is shown by the ominous passage which appears later in that same
Book:</p>

<p>O banks of the Rhine! We have seen
you covered with gore, inasmuch as the swords of retribution were
drawn against you; and you shall have another turn. And We hear the
lamentations of Berlin, though she be today in conspicuous glory.<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Promised Day, p. 37.</p></note></p>

<p>A strikingly different note characterizes two of the
major pronouncements, that addressed to Queen Victoria<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Promised Day, p. 35.</p></note>
and another to the “Rulers of America and the Presidents of the
Republics therein.” The former praises the pioneering
achievement represented by the abolition of slavery throughout the
British Empire, and commends the principle of representative
government. The latter, which opens with the announcement of the Day
of God, concludes with a summons, a virtual mandate, that has no
parallel in any of the other messages: “Bind ye the broken with
the hands of justice, and crush the oppressor who flourisheth with
the rod of the commandments of your Lord, the Ordainer, the
All-Wise.”<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Shoghi Effendi, Citadel of Faith: Messages to America 1947–1957
(Wilmette: Bahá’í Publishing Trust, 1980), pp.
18–19.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Religion as Light and Darkness</head>

<p>Bahá’u’lláh’s severest
condemnation is reserved for the barriers which, throughout history,
organized religion has erected between humanity and the Revelations
of God. Dogmas, inspired by popular superstition and perfected by
misspent intelligence, have repeatedly been imposed on a Divine
process whose purpose has at all times been spiritual and moral. Laws
of social interaction, revealed for the purpose of consolidating
community life, have been made the basis for structures of arcane
doctrine and practice which have burdened the masses whose benefit
they were supposed to serve. Even the exercise of intellect, the
chief tool possessed by the human race, has been deliberately
hampered, producing an eventual breakdown in the dialogue between
faith and science upon which civilized life depends.</p>

<p>The consequence of this sorry record is the worldwide
disrepute into which religion has fallen. Worse, organized religion
has become itself a most virulent cause of hatred and warfare among
the peoples of the world. “Religious fanaticism and hatred,”
Bahá’u’lláh warned over a century ago, “are
a world-devouring fire, whose violence none can quench. The Hand of
Divine power can, alone, deliver mankind from this desolating
affliction.”<note place="foot"><p>Epistle,
p. 14.</p></note></p>

<p>Those whom God will hold responsible for this tragedy,
Bahá’u’lláh says, are humanity’s
religious leaders, who have presumed to speak for Him throughout
history. Their attempts to make the Word of God a private preserve,
and its exposition a means for personal aggrandizement, have been the
greatest single handicap against which the advancement of
civilization has struggled. In the pursuit of their ends, many of
them have not hesitated to raise their hands against the Messengers
of God themselves, at their advent:</p>

<p>Leaders of religion, in every age,
have hindered their people from attaining the shores of eternal
salvation, inasmuch as they held the reins of authority in their
mighty grasp. Some for the lust of leadership, others through want of
knowledge and understanding, have been the cause of the deprivation
of the people. By their sanction and authority, every Prophet of God
hath drunk from the chalice of sacrifice...<note place="foot"><p>Certitude,
p. 15.</p></note></p>

<p>In an address to the clergy of all faiths, Bahá’u’lláh
warns of the responsibility which they have so carelessly assumed in
history:</p>

<p>Ye are even as a spring. If it be
changed, so will the streams that branch out from it be changed. Fear
God, and be numbered with the godly. In like manner, if the heart of
man be corrupted, his limbs will also be corrupted. And similarly, if
the root of a tree be corrupted, its branches, and its offshoots, and
its leaves, and its fruits, will be corrupted.<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Promised Day, p. 83.</p></note></p>

<p>These same statements, revealed at a time when religious
orthodoxy was one of the major powers throughout the world, declared
that this power had effectively ended, and that the ecclesiastical
caste has no further social role in world history: “O concourse
of divines! Ye shall not henceforward behold yourselves possessed of
any power...”<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Promised Day, p. 81.</p></note>
To a particularly vindictive opponent among the Muslim clergy,
Bahá’u’lláh said: “Thou art even as
the last trace of sunlight upon the mountaintop. Soon will it fade
away as decreed by God, the All-Possessing, the Most High. Thy glory
and the glory of such as are like thee have been taken away...”<note place="foot"><p>Epistle,
p. 99.</p></note></p>

<p>It is not the organization of religious activity which
these statements address, but the misuse of such resources.
Bahá’u’lláh’s writings are generous
in their appreciation not only of the great contribution which
organized religion has brought to civilization, but also of the
benefits which the world has derived from the self-sacrifice and love
of humanity that have characterized clergymen and religious orders of
all faiths:</p>

<p>Those divines ... who are truly
adorned with the ornament of knowledge and of a goodly character are,
verily, as a head to the body of the world, and as eyes to the
nations....<note place="foot"><p>Cited
in Promised Day, pp. 110–11.</p></note></p>

<p>Rather, the challenge to all people, believers and
unbelievers, clergy and laymen alike, is to recognize the
consequences now being visited upon the world as the result of the
universal corruption of the religious impulse. In the prevailing
alienation of humanity from God over the past century, a relationship
on which the fabric of moral life itself depends has broken down.
Natural faculties of the rational soul, vital to the development and
maintenance of human values, have become universally discounted:</p>

<p>The vitality of men’s belief in
God is dying out in every land; nothing short of His wholesome
medicine can ever restore it. The corrosion of ungodliness is eating
into the vitals of human society; what else but the Elixir of His
potent Revelation can cleanse and revive it?... The Word of God,
alone, can claim the distinction of being endowed with the capacity
required for so great and far-reaching a change.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 200.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>World
Peace</head>

<p>In the light of subsequent events, the warnings and
appeals of Bahá’u’lláh’s writings
during this period take on a terrible poignancy:</p>

<p>O ye the elected representatives of the people in every
land!... Regard the world as the human body which, though at its
creation whole and perfect, hath been afflicted, through various
causes, with grave disorders and maladies. Not for one day did it
gain ease, nay its sickness waxed more severe, as it fell under the
treatment of ignorant physicians, who gave full rein to their
personal desires...</p>

<p>We behold it, in this day, at the
mercy of rulers so drunk with pride that they cannot discern clearly
their own best advantage, much less recognize a Revelation so
bewildering and challenging as this....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 254–55.</p></note></p>

<p>This is the Day whereon the earth
shall tell out her tidings. The workers of iniquity are her burdens,
could ye but perceive it....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 40.</p></note></p>

<p>All men have been created to carry
forward an ever-advancing civilization. The Almighty beareth Me
witness: To act like the beasts of the field is unworthy of man.
Those virtues that befit his dignity are forbearance, mercy,
compassion and loving-kindness towards all the peoples and kindreds
of the earth....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 215.</p></note></p>

<p>A new life is, in this age, stirring
within all the peoples of the earth; and yet none hath discovered its
cause or perceived its motive. Consider the peoples of the West.
Witness how, in their pursuit of that which is vain and trivial, they
have sacrificed, and are still sacrificing, countless lives for the
sake of its establishment and promotion....<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 196.</p></note></p>

<p>In all matters moderation is
desirable. If a thing is carried to excess, it will prove a source of
evil.... Strange and astonishing things exist in the earth but they
are hidden from the minds and the understanding of men. These things
are capable of changing the whole atmosphere of the earth and their
contamination would prove lethal....<note place="foot"><p>Tablets,
p. 69.</p></note></p>

<p>In later writings, including those addressed to humanity
collectively, Bahá’u’lláh urged the
adoption of steps toward what He called the “Great Peace.”
These, He said, would mitigate the sufferings and dislocation which
He saw lying ahead of the human race until the world’s peoples
embrace the Revelation of God and through it bring about the Most
Great Peace:</p>

<p>The time must come when the
imperative necessity for the holding of a vast, an all-embracing
assemblage of men will be universally realized. The rulers and kings
of the earth must needs attend it, and, participating in its
deliberations, must consider such ways and means as will lay the
foundations of the world’s Great Peace amongst men. Such a
peace demandeth that the Great Powers should resolve, for the sake of
the tranquility of the peoples of the earth, to be fully reconciled
among themselves. Should any king take up arms against another, all
should unitedly arise and prevent him. If this be done, the nations
of the world will no longer require any armaments, except for the
purpose of preserving the security of their realms and of maintaining
internal order within their territories.... The day is approaching
when all the peoples of the world will have adopted one universal
language and one common script. When this is achieved, to whatsoever
city a man may journey, it shall be as if he were entering his own
home.... That one indeed is a man who, today, dedicateth himself to
the service of the entire human race.... It is not for him to pride
himself who loveth his own country, but rather for him who loveth the
whole world. The earth is but one country, and mankind its citizens.<note place="foot"><p>Tablets,
pp. 165–67.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>“Not
of Mine Own Volition”</head>

<p>In His letter to Náṣiri’d-Dín
<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Sh</hi>áh, the ruler of Persia, which refrains from any
rebuke concerning His imprisonment in the Síyáh-<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Ch</hi>ál
and the other injustices He had experienced at the king’s hand,
Bahá’u’lláh speaks of His own role in the
Divine Plan:</p>

<p>I was but a man like others, asleep
upon My couch, when lo, the breezes of the All-Glorious were wafted
over Me, and taught Me the knowledge of all that hath been. This
thing is not from Me, but from One Who is Almighty and All-Knowing.
And He bade Me lift up My voice between earth and heaven, and for
this there befell Me what hath caused the tears of every man of
understanding to flow. The learning current amongst men I studied
not; their schools I entered not. Ask of the city wherein I dwelt,
that thou mayest be well assured that I am not of them who speak
falsely.<note place="foot"><p>Epistle,
p. 11. The phrase “Not of Mine own volition” appears in
the same paragraph immediately above the excerpt cited.</p></note></p>

<p>The mission to which He had devoted His entire life,
which had cost Him the life of a cherished younger son<note place="foot"><p>Bahá’u’lláh’s
son, Mírzá Mihdí, a youth of twenty-two, died
in 1870 in an accidental fall resulting from the conditions in which
the family was imprisoned.</p></note>
, as well as all of His material , possessions which had undermined
His health, and brought imprisonment, exile, and abuse, was not one
that He had initiated. “Not of Mine own volition,” He
said, had He entered on such a course:</p>

<p>Think ye, O people, that I hold
within My grasp the control of God’s ultimate Will and
Purpose?... Had the ultimate destiny of God’s Faith been in
Mine hands, I would have never consented, even though for one moment,
to manifest Myself unto you, nor would I have allowed one word to
fall from My lips. Of this God Himself is, verily, a witness.<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
pp. 91.</p></note></p>

<p>Having surrendered unreservedly to God’s summons,
He was equally in no doubt about the role which He had been called
upon to play in human history. As the Manifestation of God to the age
of fulfillment, He is the one promised in all the scriptures of the
past, the “Desire of all nations,” the “King of
Glory.” To Judaism He is “Lord of Hosts”; to
Christianity, the Return of Christ in the glory of the Father; to
Islam, the “Great Announcement”; to Buddhism, the
Maitreya Buddha; to Hinduism, the new incarnation of Krishna; to
Zoroastrianism, the advent of “<hi rend="text-decoration: underline">Sh</hi>áh-Bahrám.”<note place="foot"><p>God
Passes By, pp. 94–96.</p></note></p>

<p>Like the Manifestations of God gone before Him, He is
both the Voice of God and its human channel: “When I
contemplate, O my God, the relationship that bindeth me to Thee, I am
moved to proclaim to all created things ‘verily I am God!’;
and when I consider my own self, lo, I find it coarser than clay!”<note place="foot"><p>World
Order, p. 113.</p></note></p>

<p>“Certain ones among you,” He declared, “have
said: ‘He it is Who hath laid claim to be God.’ By God!
This is a gross calumny. I am but a servant of God Who hath believed
in Him and in His signs... My tongue, and My heart, and My inner and
My outer being testify that there is no God but Him, that all others
have been created by His behest, and been fashioned through the
operation of His Will.... I am He that telleth abroad the favors with
which God hath, through His bounty, favored Me. If this be My
transgression, then I am truly the first of the transgressors....”<note place="foot"><p>Gleanings,
p. 228.</p></note></p>

<p>Bahá’u’lláh’s writings
seize upon a host of metaphors in their attempt to express the
paradox that lies at the heart of the phenomenon of God’s
Revelation of His Will:</p>

<p>I am the royal Falcon on the arm of
the Almighty. I unfold the drooping wings of every broken bird and
start it on its flight.<note place="foot"><p>Tablets,
p. 169.</p></note></p>

<p>This is but a leaf which the winds of
the will of thy Lord, the Almighty, the All-Praised, have stirred.
Can it be still when the tempestuous winds are blowing? Nay, by Him
Who is the Lord of all Names and Attributes! They move it as they
list....<note place="foot"><p>Epistle,
pp. 11–12.</p></note></p>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>The
Covenant of God with Humankind</head>

<p>In June 1877, Bahá’u’lláh at
last emerged from the strict confinement of the prison-city of Akká,
and moved with His family to “Mazra‘ih”, a small
estate a few miles north of the city.<note place="foot"><p>Although
Sulṭán ‘Abdu’l-‘Azíz’
order of banishment was never formally revoked, the responsible
political authorities came to regard it as null and void. They,
therefore, indicated that Bahá’u’lláh
could establish His residence outside the city walls, should He
choose to do so.</p></note>
As had been predicted in His statement to the Turkish government,
Sulṭán ‘Abdu’l-‘Azíz had been
overthrown and assassinated in a palace coup, and gusts from the
winds of political change sweeping the world were beginning to invade
even the shuttered precincts of the Ottoman imperial system. After a
brief two-year stay at Mazra‘ih, Bahá’u’lláh
moved to “Bahjí”, a large mansion surrounded by
gardens, which His son ‘Abdu’l-Bahá had rented for
Him and the members of His extended family.<note place="foot"><p>The
mansion, which had been built by a wealthy Christian Arab merchant
of Akká, had been abandoned by him when an outbreak of plague
began to spread. The property was first rented and, some years after
Bahá’u’lláh’s passing, purchased by
the Bahá’í community. Bahá’u’lláh’s
grave is located in a Shrine in the gardens of Bahjí, and is
now the focal point of pilgrimage for the Bahá’í
world.</p></note>
The remaining twelve years of His life were devoted to His writings
on a wide range of spiritual and social issues, and to receiving a
stream of Bahá’í pilgrims who made their way,
with great difficulty, from Persia and other lands.</p>

<p>Throughout the Near and Middle East the nucleus of a
community life was beginning to take shape among those who had
accepted His message. For its guidance, Bahá’u’lláh
had revealed a system of laws and institutions designed to give
practical effect to the principles in His writings.<note place="foot"><p>For
a summary of this body of teaching see World Order, pp. 143–57,
and Shoghi Effendi’s Principles of Bahá’í
Administration (London: Bahá’í Publishing Trust,
1973), throughout. A fully annotated English translation of the
central document in this body of writings, the Kitáb-i-Aqdas
(“The Most Holy Book”), is being published to coincide
with the centenary of Bahá’u’lláh’s
passing, 1992.</p></note>
Authority was vested in councils democratically elected by the whole
community, provisions were made to exclude the possibility of a
clerical elite arising, and principles of consultation and group
decision making were established.</p>

<p>At the heart of this system was what Bahá’u’lláh
termed a “new Covenant” between God and humankind. The
distinguishing feature of humanity’s coming of age is that, for
the first time in its history, the entire human race is consciously
involved, however dimly, in the awareness of its own oneness and of
the earth as a single homeland. This awakening opens the way to a new
relationship between God and humankind. As the peoples of the world
embrace the spiritual authority inherent in the guidance of the
Revelation of God for this age, Bahá’u’lláh
said, they will find in themselves a moral empowerment which human
effort alone has proven incapable of generating. “A new race of
men”<note place="foot"><p>Advent,
p. 16.</p></note>
will emerge as the result of this relationship, and the work of
building a global civilization will begin. The mission of the Bahá’í
community was to demonstrate the efficacy of this Covenant in healing
the ills that divide the human race.</p>

<p>Bahá’u’lláh died at Bahjí
on May 29, 1892, in His 75th year. At the time of His passing, the
cause entrusted to Him forty years earlier in the darkness of
Teheran’s Black Pit was poised to break free of the Islamic
lands where it had taken shape, and to establish itself first across
America and Europe and then throughout the world. In doing so, it
would itself become a vindication of the promise of the new Covenant
between God and humankind. For alone of all the world’s
independent religions, the Bahá’í Faith and its
community of believers were to pass successfully through the critical
first century of their existence with their unity firmly intact,
undamaged by the age-old blight of schism and faction. Their
experience offers compelling evidence for Bahá’u’lláh’s
assurance that the human race, in all its diversity, can learn to
live and work as one people, in a common global homeland.</p>

<p>Just two years before His death, Bahá’u’lláh
received at Bahjí one of the few Westerners to meet Him, and
the only one to leave a written account of the experience. The
visitor was Edward Granville Browne, a rising young orientalist from
Cambridge University, whose attention had originally been attracted
by the dramatic history of the Báb and His heroic band of
followers. Of his meeting with Bahá’u’lláh,
Browne wrote:</p>

<p>Though I dimly suspected whither I
was going and whom I was to behold (for no distinct intimation had
been given to me), a second or two elapsed ere, with a throb of
wonder and awe, I became definitely conscious that the room was not
untenanted. In the corner where the divan met the wall sat a wondrous
and venerable figure... The face of him on whom I gazed I can never
forget, though I cannot describe it. Those piercing eyes seemed to
read one’s very soul; power and authority sat on that ample
brow... No need to ask in whose presence I stood, as I bowed myself
before one who is the object of a devotion and love which kings might
envy and emperors sigh for in vain! A mild dignified voice bade me be
seated, and then continued:--“Praise be to God that thou
hast attained!...Thou hast come to see a prisoner and an exile...We
desire but the good of the world and the happiness of the nations;
yet they deem us a stirrer up of strife and sedition worthy of
bondage and banishment...That all nations should become one in faith
and all men as brothers; that the bonds of affection and unity
between the sons of men should be strengthened; that diversity of
religion should cease, and differences of race be annulled--what
harm is there in this?...Yet so it shall be; these fruitless strifes,
these ruinous wars shall pass away, and the ‘Most great Peace’
shall come...”<note place="foot"><p>Edward
G. Browne, A Traveller’s Narrative (New York: Bahá’í
Publishing Committee, 1930), pp. xxxix-xl.</p></note></p>
</div>

</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>

</back>

    </text>
</TEI.2>

<!--
A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19290-tei.tei or 19290-tei.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/2/9/19290/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
-->
